# Subsection_L_Fuster

Soler, et al. The shape of cancer relapse: Topological data analysis predicts recurrence in paediatric acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. PLOS Computational Biology, 19(8):e1011329, 2023. [20] P. Dlotko. Cubical complex. In GUDHI User and Reference Manual. GUDHI Editorial Board, 3.10.1 edition, 2024. [21] H. Edelsbrunner and J. L. Harer. Computational Topology - an Introduction. American Math- ematical Society, 2010. [22] H. Edelsbrunner, D. Letscher, and A. Zomorodian. Topological persistence and simplification. In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS ’00, page 454, USA, 2000. IEEE Computer Society. 9 [23] P. Edwards, K. Skruber, N. Mili´cevi´c, J. B. Heidings, T.-A. Read, P. Bubenik, and E. A. Vitriol. TDAExplore: Quantitative analysis of fluorescence microscopy images through topology-based machine learning. Patterns, 2(11), Nov 2021. [24] M. Gidea and Y. Katz. Topological data analysis of financial time series: Landscapes of crashes. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 491:820–834, 2018. [25] B. Giunti, J. Lazovskis, and B. Rieck. Donut: Creation, development, and opportunities of a database. Notices of the American Mathematical Society, 70(10):1640–1644, 2023. [26] C. Giusti, E. Pastalkova, C. Curto, and V. Itskov. Clique topology reveals intrinsic geo- metric structure in neural correlations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(44):13455–13460, 2015. [27] G. Henselman and R. Ghrist. Matroid Filtrations and Computational Persistent Homology. ArXiv e-prints, June 2016. [28] Heydenreich, Sven, Br¨uck, Benjamin, and Harnois-D´eraps, Joachim. Persistent homology in cosmic shear: Constraining parameters with topological data analysis. A&A, 648:A74, 2021. [29] R. Mendoza-Smith. Numerical algorithms for the mathematics of information. PhD thesis, University of Oxford, 2017. [30] R. Mendoza-Smith and J. Tanner. Parallel multi-scale reduction of persistent homology filtra- tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04710, 2017. [31] K. Mischaikow and V. Nanda. Morse theory for filtrations and efficient computation of per- sistent homology. Discrete Comput. Geom., 50(2):330–353, 2013. [32] F. C. Motta, R. Neville, P. D. Shipman, D. A. Pearson, and R. M. Bradley. Measures of order for nearly hexagonal lattices. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 380-381:17–30, 2018. [33] D. D. Nguyen, Z. Cang, K. Wu, M. Wang, Y. Cao, and G.-W. Wei. Mathematical deep learning for pose and binding affinity prediction and ranking in d3r grand challenges. Journal of Computer-Aided Molecular Design, 33(1):71–82, Jan 2019. [34] N. Otter, M. A. Porter, U. Tillmann, P. Grindrod, and H. A. Harrington. A roadmap for the computation of persistent homology. EPJ Data Science, 6(1):17, 2017. [35] T. Papamarkou, T. Birdal, M. M. Bronstein, G. E. Carlsson, J. Curry, Y. Gao, M. Hajij, R. Kwitt, P. Lio,